document,chunk,text,question
"the-roar-of-battle","3","The shot travel at velocities up to and over the speed of sound, and every shot fired at the ship side punches a hole completely through up to 80 cm of solid oak.","What is the maximum thickness of solid oak that each shot can completely penetrate?"
"fishing-for-cannons","1","Repeated attempts to raise the ship fail; it is firmly stuck in the mud of the harbour bottom.","Were the attempts to salvage the ship unsuccessful due to it being lodged in the harbour's bottom mud?"
"drying-out","1","Even after being sprayed for 17 years, the ship has a long way to go.","How long has the boat been treated with spray?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","5","Divers will spend another year and a half preparing the ship for the final lift.","How long will it take divers to prepare the ship for the final lift?"
"the-machine-of-war-is-launched","1","When completed, it is 69 metres long and more than 50 metres tall from the keel to the top of the main mast.","What is the height from the base to the top of the main mast when finished?"
"the-shortest-maiden-voyage-in-history?","1","Still within sight of the shipyard where it was built, Vasa heels to port under a gust and water gushes in through the open gun-ports.","What happened when a gust hit the Vasa near the shipyard where it was built?"
"drying-out","2","The wood has to dry slowly to avoid cracking, and over the next ten years the humidity is gradually lowered.","What process must the wood undergo over a decade to prevent it from cracking?"
"50th-anniversary-and-record-visitor-numbers","1","The Vasa Museum sets a new record with well over 1.2 million visitors.","What museum recently set a new record with more than 1.2 million visitors?"
"the-machine-of-war-is-launched","2","The ship weighs over 1200 tonnes once outfitted with ten sails, 64 cannons, 120 tonnes of ballast and hundreds of sculptures.","What is the approximate weight of the ship after it is equipped with sails, cannons, ballast, and sculptures?"
"fishing-for-cannons","3","They use a recently perfected invention, the diving bell, to reach the ship, rip up the deck, and extract guns, which are sold abroad.","What invention was recently perfected and used to reach the ship and extract guns?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","6","Could it be Vasa?","Is it possible that it's Vasa?"
"millennium-bug","0","In summer 2000, the weather is terrible, with nearly constant rain.","How was the weather during the summer of 2000?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","2","After his drag has once again caught an obstruction on the bottom, his coring device has returned to the surface with a plug of black, waterlogged oak.","What type of material was brought back to the surface by the coring device?"
"vasa-gets-a-new-home","2","The ship is the centrepiece of themed exhibits about all aspects of naval life in the early 17th century.","What is the main focus of the exhibits that revolve around naval life in the early 17th century?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","5","Franzén has enough evidence to persuade the navy to send a diving team to investigate.","Did the evidence gathered by Franzén convince the navy to dispatch a diving team for further investigation?"
"50th-anniversary-and-record-visitor-numbers","2","After half a century of conservation and restoration work, the success of Vasa is easy to understand: it is unique, an intact ship from a forgotten time.","What makes the Vasa ship special after fifty years of conservation and restoration?"
"the-master-of-shipwright-fades-away","0","Vasa´s keel is laid in the late winter at Skeppsgården, the navy yard, in Stockholm.","Where was Vasa's keel laid in the late winter?"
"a-faithful-contract","4","It is the beginning of one of the most spectacular fiascos in Swedish history.","What event marks a significant disaster in the history of Sweden?"
"the-master-of-shipwright-fades-away","1","Master Henrik Hybertsson, already ill when construction starts, can no longer supervise the other shipwrights by the summer and has to hand over responsibility for the new ship to his assistant, Hein Jakobsson.","Who took over the construction of the new ship when the original supervisor fell ill?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","4","The ship is lifted and moved under the water surface in 18 stages, and in September Vasa lies at a depth of 17 metres by the island of Kastellholmen.","How many stages were involved in lifting the ship under the water surface?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","0","The calendar shows 25 August 1956 when Anders Franzén, a fuels engineer, finally gets a bite.","What occupation did the individual who got a 'bite' on August 25, 1956 have?"
"a-faithful-contract","1","In January 1625, the Swedish king signs a contract with the Dutch master shipwright Henrik Hybertsson and his business partner, Arendt de Groote.","Who did the Swedish king sign a contract with in the 17th century?"
"the-roar-of-battle","0","In 2013, an exact copy of one of Vasa's cannon is cast at Tierps Jernbruk.","Where was a replica of Vasa's cannon created in 2013?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","0","The proposals are many and imaginative, everything from filling Vasa with ping-pong balls to freezing it in a giant ice-cube.","What are some of the creative ideas suggested for the handling of Vasa?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","0","A fearful Royal Council writes to tell the king of the disaster.","Who was informed by the Royal Council about the disaster?"
"new-bolts","1","Now eight tons lighter and with new steel bolts highly resistant to corrosion reducing the risk of chemical reactions in the wood, Vasa is expected to last for many years to come.","What measures have been taken to extend the longevity of Vasa?"
"50th-anniversary-and-record-visitor-numbers","3","Over 98% of the original structure survives, including masts and sails, so it does not look like a wreck, but a ship awaiting the start of the next voyage, just as Vasa looked in the winter of 1628.","How much of the original structure of the ship still remains intact?"
"a-faithful-contract","0","The Lion of the North, Gustav II Adolf, is building Sweden into one of the most feared powers in Europe.","Who is strengthening Sweden to be among the most intimidating forces in Europe?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","1","Dark winter days poring over old documents in dusty archives, rainy summer days dragging the bottom of Stockholm harbour, have led to this.","What led to the spending of dark winter and rainy summer days studying old documents and exploring Stockholm harbour?"
"the-admiral-does-not-listen-to-the-warning-bells","1","He has thirty men run back and forth across the deck and the ship rolls alarmingly.","What happens to the ship when thirty men run back and forth across the deck?"
"the-shortest-maiden-voyage-in-history?","3","Thousands of Stockholm´s inhabitants witness the tragic scene, together with several foreign ambassadors.","Who was present to observe the tragic incident in Stockholm?"
"the-roar-of-battle","1","A year later, after building a replica section of Vasa as a target, researchers test fire the gun over 50 times.","What was the purpose of constructing a replica section of Vasa?"
"the-master-of-shipwright-fades-away","2","Barely a year later, Vasa´s designer is dead.","Who passed away a year after Vasa's design was completed?"
"millennium-bug","4","Media reports trumpet that the ship is in danger of dissolving away before the visitors' eyes.","Is there a risk of the ship disappearing before people can see it?"
"the-shortest-maiden-voyage-in-history?","2","Within minutes, the ship is lying on the sea bed 32 metres below.","How deep below the sea bed did the ship sink?"
"the-admiral-does-not-listen-to-the-warning-bells","0","The captain supervising the construction of Vasa, Söfring Hansson, calls Vice Admiral Klas Fleming down to the ship, moored at the royal palace, because he is worried.","Why was the captain who was overseeing the building of the ship concerned?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","2","The ship´s officers claim innocence.","Do the officers on the ship maintain their innocence?"
"new-bolts","0","It took seven years to replace her 4,000 rusty iron bolts, but Vasa is in much better shape for it.","How long did it take to replace the rusty iron bolts?"
"the-end-of-a-long-beauty-sleep","2","A ship from the 17th century is headline material in newspapers around the world.","Why is a 17th century ship making news globally?"
"the-shortest-maiden-voyage-in-history?","4","What began in hope and ambition ends in tragedy.","What emotions did the situation start and end with?"
"millennium-bug","2","Then alarm bells ring for the conservation staff: yellow and white spots appear on the ship and many of the artefacts.","What appeared on the ship and its artefacts causing concern for the conservation staff?"
"a-faithful-contract","2","They are to build four new ships.","How many new ships are planned to be constructed?"
"the-admiral-does-not-listen-to-the-warning-bells","4","Months later, Vasa sets off on its first and last voyage.","Did Vasa's initial journey also turn out to be its final one?"
"millennium-bug","1","Tens of thousands of wet visitors raise the humidity in the museum, and it swings wildly during each day as the overworked climate plant tries to catch up.","Does the museum's humidity fluctuate daily due to the large number of damp tourists and the overtaxed climate control system?"
"the-machine-of-war-is-launched","0","The king´s newest and most powerful ship, Vasa, is launched in the spring and hundreds of craftsmen work through the summer to finish the hull and rigging.","What was the king's latest and strongest ship that craftsmen worked on throughout the summer to complete?"
"the-end-of-a-long-beauty-sleep","0","Many Stockholm residents probably remember that it was Monday, 24 April 1961.","Do a lot of people in Stockholm likely recall a specific Monday in 1961?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","3","On 20 August 1959, the pumps start in the pontoons and Vasa frees itself from the mud.","When did the pumps start in the pontoons to free Vasa from the mud?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","6","Master Henrik, dead more than a year, cannot defend himself and does not need to be punished.","Is it necessary to penalize someone who has been deceased for over a year?"
"operation-preserve-vasa","2","In order to prevent Vasa from being destroyed, conservation of the ship begins using polyethylene glycol, PEG, to replace the water.","What substance was used to conserve Vasa and prevent its destruction?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","5","The blame falls on the designer, Henrik Hybertsson, for the poor proportions.","Who is responsible for the poor proportions?"
"fishing-for-cannons","0","The sunken ship is a tempting target for salvors and assorted chancers.","Who is attracted to the submerged vessel?"
"operation-preserve-vasa","4","This treatment will continue until 1979.","Until what year will the treatment continue?"
"vasa-is-nearly-turned-into-furniture","1","They plan to blow up the wrecks to get black oak, waterlogged wood, which is popular in Sweden for Art Deco furniture.","What is the purpose of blowing up the wrecks?"
"vasa-is-nearly-turned-into-furniture","0","Two brothers from Oskarshamn, Simon and Leonard Olschanski, apply for permission to salvage ships sunk in Stockholm harbour between Beckholmen, where Vasa lies, and Tegelviken.","Who applied for permission to salvage sunken ships in Stockholm harbour?"
"news-frenzy","0","Swedish radio interrupts its regular programming and broadcasts direct from the salvage operation when one of Vasa's cannon is brought up from the deep.","What was the occasion for which the Swedish radio disrupted its usual program?"
"the-machine-of-war-is-launched","3","A giant of a ship of its time is born.","What is special about the ship referenced in the text?"
"the-admiral-does-not-listen-to-the-warning-bells","2","The Admiral has the demonstration stopped, afraid the ship will sink at the quay.","Why did the Admiral halt the demonstration?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","3","The builders are adamant that they built the ship according to the design the king approved.","Did the builders construct the ship based on the plan approved by the king?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","3","Another core 20 meters away produces the same result.","Is there another core located 20 meters away that yields the same outcome?"
"the-end-of-a-long-beauty-sleep","1","People by the thousands are crowded in with Swedish and international media around Kastellholmen when Vasa first appears from the deep after 333 years of hibernation.","What event led to a large gathering of Swedish and international media along with thousands of people at Kastellholmen?"
"vasa-meets-the-public","0","By Friday 16 February 1962, the ship is ready to be displayed to the general public at the newly-constructed Wasa Shipyard, where visitors can see Vasa while a team of conservators, carpenters and other technicians work to preserve the ship.","What was the purpose of the team of conservators, carpenters, and other technicians at the Wasa Shipyard?"
"operation-preserve-vasa","1","When waterlogged wood dries out, and the moisture in it evaporates, it shrinks and cracks.","What happens to waterlogged wood when it dries out?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","2","Divers have spent more than two years digging tunnels and passing cables under the ship up to floating pontoons.","What have divers been doing for more than two years relating to a ship and floating pontoons?"
"vasa-moves-for-the-first-time-in-331-years","1","But the Neptune Company insists on a tried-and-tested method, used since the Middle Ages to raise sunken ships.","What technique does the Neptune Company use to salvage sunken ships?"
"news-frenzy","1","Each new find, each twist and turn in the saga of raising the ship is a news story.","What is the significance of every new discovery and development in the process of salvaging the vessel?"
"vasa-is-nearly-turned-into-furniture","2","But the authorities say no - a crucial decision that makes it possible for the Vasa Museum to exist today.","Why does the Vasa Museum exist today according to the authorities?"
"drying-out","3","In fact, drying will go on for decades until the ship stabilizes completely.","How long will the drying process of the ship continue?"
"entry-into-the-world´s-top-10-attractions","0","As the only Swedish entry, the Vasa Museum, in ninth place makes it onto the top 10 list of the world´s best museums according to TripAdvisor, the world´s largest travel site.","What ranking did the only Swedish museum achieve on TripAdvisor's list of the world's best museums?"
"operation-preserve-vasa","0","Reconstructing and preserving a mighty warship from the 17th century is an enormous challenge.","What are some challenges associated with preserving a 17th century warship?"
"operation-preserve-vasa","3","Loose objects are placed in large baths, while the hull of the ship is sprayed around the clock with the help of 500 nozzles and an elaborate pumping and filtering system.","How is the ship's hull cleaned with the use of a pumping and filtering system?"
"fishing-for-cannons","2","Finally, 35 years after the sinking, a team of divers led by Albrecht von Treileben and Andreas Peckell succeed in bringing up almost all of Vasa´s cannons.","How long after the shipwreck were almost all of its cannons retrieved by a team of divers?"
"50th-anniversary-and-record-visitor-numbers","0","Tourists make the pilgrimage when Vasa celebrates the 50th anniversary of its recovery from the depths.","When is the 50th anniversary of the recovery being celebrated?"
"millennium-bug","3","These suggest that the high humidity is combining with sulphur in the wood to produce destructive acids.","What elements are combining to produce destructive acids according to the text?"
"vasa-gets-a-new-home","0","384 proposals from all over the Nordic countries are received when an architectural competition to build the new Vasa Museum is launched in 1981.","How many proposals were submitted for the architectural competition to construct the new museum in the Nordic countries?"
"vasa-gets-a-new-home","1","Swedish architects Hidemark Månsson Arkitektkontor AB wins against tough competition and, on 15 June 1990, the new museum is officiallt opened.","Which architecture firm won the competition to design the new museum that opened in June 1990?"
"a-faithful-contract","3","One of them, Vasa, is to be the most powerful warship in the Baltic, if not the world.","Which ship is considered the most powerful warship in the Baltic, possibly even the world?"
"vasa-meets-the-public","2","Public interest is enormous and success is immediate – in 1962, 439,300 buy a ticket to see the ship and its unique finds.","How many people purchased a ticket to view the ship and its finds in its initial year?"
"the-admiral-does-not-listen-to-the-warning-bells","3","Under pressure from the king to get the ship to sea, he orders Söfring to sail anyway.","Who was ordered to set sail despite the pressure from the king?"
"millennium-bug","5","The immediate solution is an entirely new, state-of-the-art climate plant, on line in 2004, and the launch of an international research project to understand what is happening in the wood and correct it.","What actions were taken to comprehend the issues with the wood and fix the problem?"
"news-frenzy","2","Vasa emerges on the international stage as a celebrity, and Per Edvin Fälting becomes a media hero, a tough, no-nonsense dive boss, everyman getting the job done.","Who became a media hero due to his tough, no-nonsense approach to diving?"
"vasa-meets-the-public","1","The museum opens with a salute from two of Vasa's cannon.","What does the museum opening ceremony involve?"
"drying-out","0","Some things just take time.","What is required for certain things to happen?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","1","An inquest is launched.","What is being initiated?"
"anders-franzén-gets-a-bite","4","There is something big, old and wooden on the bottom in front of the island of Beckholmen.","What type of large object is located at the bottom near the island of Beckholmen?"
"the-shortest-maiden-voyage-in-history?","0","1,300 metres and no farther.","What is the maximum distance mentioned?"
"the-roar-of-battle","2","They discover that the cannon has an potential range of over 1000 meters, but the rolling of the ship would make it impossible to hit anything at that distance, so actual combat range was probably less than 500 meters.","What factors limited the cannon's effective combat range on the ship?"
"the-perfect-scapegoat","4","The experts believe the ship had too little belly, not enough hull to carry the heavy upper works.","What was the problem with the ship's design according to experts?"
